So what is the status since five years ago with your
father?
Five years, my dad was in concentration camp,
which was out in the open country and all that, and
lived in a shed. And he had his best friend with him.
So that was one of the good things. At least they had
some friends. And he would tell us that they would
make him go farm, plant stuff, plant food, chop
down trees, you know, very hard thing, carry wood.
Basically, it was just for his own good because he
had to do everything for himself. They did not
provide anything. So in other words, he had to
plant food for him to eat, and also for them to take
some, too. So, in other words, you had to do it for
them and for you. Plant your own shed, and if it gets
rotten down by the rain, because they lived five
years, it's so long, they had to renew it every
time, because they stay there for a long period of
time, so they had to rebuild it and all that. And my
grandparents, one time my dad actually knew where
he was at. So my grandparents would go down and
would meet him. And the thing was that when they
came down, the land had barbed wires around the
place that they were being held. And there would be
a guard escorting you to go in, but not inside past
the barbed wire. You would stay out there, and
anybody who wanted to talk to you would come out.
And it's just kind of like a prison where you have a
little wall between you, and you have to talk
between them. And it was just like that. And my
grandparents, they were really glad that they see
him and all that. And they did not want you to have a
really long meeting, long talk. So they wanted to
make it brief. And then if you would have it long,
they would make you leave and all that. And so my
grandparents did that at least two times the most
because they were getting old. they could not take
the long travels and all that. So they
met him twice. And later on, at the beginning,
after that, we thought that the communists, they
were getting a little bit easy. They're getting
easy so that they let their families see each
other. But then later on, We found out that the
reason why they wanted us to see him was that he was
going to be moved to somewhere else. And then we
would not know where he is at again. So in other
words, we would be back to square one not knowing
where he is. And so a couple months later on, After
my grandparents met him for the last time, and then
he stopped sending letters for the last two months
and all that. So my mom wrote a letter back to my
grandparents and asked them, what's taking so
long? What happened and all that? And so she said,
there's something wrong. There's something
wrong. They must be doing something to him. She has
not received letters from him at all and all that.
So we were getting really worried. We said, uh-oh,
looks like they're getting into the tough stuff
and all that. Well, during that time, we didn't
know anything. But then later on, we received his
letter. And he said he don't know where he is. And he
told us that his best friend died because he
couldn't handle it anymore. He was getting real
skinny. Basically, my dad thought, think that he
died, his best friend died because of
malnutrition because all they ate was, all they,
all the communists gave them was just rice and they
were not white rice. They were, back in the, back in
Vietnam you would have two kinds of rice. There
would be white rice for the people to eat and the
other rice is red for the for the pigs to eat, which
is kind of like barley or oats or something like
that. And so they would feed you red rice. That's
what we called it. They would feed you red rice, and
that was it. You had your own food and all that. So
basically, they ate rice plain or rice with salt
every day. If you would not eat, you would starve.
My dad said that's probably one reason why his best
friend died. Another thing was too much pressure.
He was going crazy because he was missing his
families and all that. So we were real sad and all
that. And then my mom asked if he was all right
because my dad had a problem with his health.
Whenever he would go to the bathroom, whenever he
would go to the bathroom, he would be bleeding. He
would be bleeding. That was my mom's real concern.
My mom's real concern was that because they did not
provide toilet paper for him so that he would have
to use leaves to wipe, you know, to clean. So if he
did that, he would have disease and, you know, it
would be infected and they would not provide
doctors for them for him to be nursed and all that.
So, you know, that, because right after when my mom
said that his best friend died, my mom started to
get worried because, you know, she said, and then
she was also thinking that maybe they're going to
keep them as long as, until they die. But then,
after that, we found out that one of my dad's uncle,
who was in the army, and he was not an officer, but he
was kind of like a well-known soldier before,
because... at the beginning of the war, he went to
fight. And he had a very good record of killing a lot
of communists. So when he was being taken, they
tortured him. They pulled out all of his teeth,
trying to ask him questions like, how did you kill
the communists? How many did you kill? And all
that. And so he would not answer. And they would
torture him. They would beat him up, break his
legs, break his arm. And he would be all bruised.
His face would be all bruised and all that, broken
ribs and all that. But then we found out that he was
being released. So he went home. And the thing
about the communists was that when they release
somebody, they don't let you know. They do not.
inform the family so that the family could come and
pick him up. They did not let you know. So my uncle
went home. He told us, he said that one day they just
say, OK, you're free to go. And they just opened the
gate. And he was left all out by himself. And so he
had nowhere to go because it was right out in the
open country. He started to go walking down the
street, and then he stopped by a place where a
stranger, where this farm family lived. And he did
not know them, but he asked them if they could help
him to contact his family and all that. And then
later on, he went home, and his wife was just
shocked that he was standing right in front of her
because he... She did not get any contact that he
was being released, but she was real happy that he
was there and in and she was happy and she was sad
because He looked like he was gonna die because he
was in such a bad shape But later on they nursed him
and all that and he was all right and so Basically,
everybody from my mom's side and my dad's side
were, was being released, except for my dad. He was
the only one left in there, and, uh, Was he tortured
in any way? He said that he did not get tortured. He
said that they... Well, I don't know if he did or not
because if he would have said it, they would have
erased it. But we would assume that he wasn't
because, by the way, of his handwriting. My mom...
and my grandmother, they would take an assumption
that his handwriting looks normal as usual. So his
health must be real fine, because he said he's
doing all right and all that. And so after two
months, they received his letter. And then he told
them, he said that he's been moved to another place
out in the country. And he would not know where he's
at again. And that was the last letter. And then two
more years passed. And then my mom started getting
to worry because my mom started to say, oh, no, this
is it. There's no way they're going to let him out at
all now. And for the whole next year, for the whole
year, for one whole year at one time, we would not
receive any letters, anything from him. The next
day, you know, and then one day, he would, we would
receive his letter, and he would say that, He was
moved to another place again. And so my
grandparents wanted to come and visit him, but my
mom told them not to because for one reason was
their health. They had to be healthy in order for
them to keep the contact going. That's one reason.
And the other reason was it was useless for you to go
because you would not know where he's at because
they kept on moving him. So why should you go see him
for him? And so, and then after seven years, seven
and a half years, my dad wrote another letter
saying that they're going to let him go. And so at
that time, my mom was real happy, was really happy.
We were all happy. The neighborhood was happy
because they actually, you know, they kind of like
knew the news because Everybody was being
released around the neighborhood except for him.
So, you know, the people would come and ask, you
know, has he been released yet and all that? How
long is he going to be released? And so one day he was
released. And I guess he was so important that they
did not let him go by himself. They actually drove
him home. They drove him home. He had the same
luggages that my mom had packed for him. And he
stayed in the house. And later on, the first couple
of days, we thought that he was already free and all
that. But then later on, a couple of days later, my
grandmother, when she'd go shopping, go grocery
and all that, she would find out that there would be
at least two or three guys hanging around the
house, the front yard of the house, the backyard of
the house, the front door, the back door, and all
that. They were practically around the house so
that they would keep an eye on him, where he would go
and all that. And so after that, my grandmother
would go back inside and told him not to go
anywhere, told him to stay inside because they're
out there. They're out there just looking after
him. And he stayed home for one month. And they took
him again. And it was just the same old procedure.
One day, they would come. They would make up an
excuse. They would say, OK, we need to ask you some
questions. So we need to take you to a certain
place. And at that time, you know, My grandmother
knew that we should not trust them at all now
because the last time they did it to all the other
people, all the other people were shocked. They
said that it was a meeting, but it wasn't. It was
actually taking everybody to the concentration
camp. So now my grandmother knew that they're
taking him again. So he was just right back in the
concentration camp again. Right, but this time
they did not tell him where he's at and all that. And
so he was taken out again and no letters for a couple
of months again. And then another day, receive a
letter saying that he's fine and he's at another
place and all that. And then he would stay for
another... for another two years. So that would
make it nine and a half years. He would stay for
another two years. And then they released him
again. In what year was this? This was, he was taken
in 76. So in around, in the 85,
September of 85 or something like that. He was
being released, and my grandmother and him talked
and all that. Then later on, he told them, my
grandmother wrote a letter to my mom and all that.
And then we found out that that last two years, he
was right inside Saigon. They kept him right in the
cities. So in other words, he did, that whole two
years, we did not receive a single letter because
they were so close in, so they did not want him to
write letters. So
he was not out in the countryside anymore. So that
two years, he was in a penitentiary that was in
Saigon. And then my mom thought, oh, no, they're
going to take him out away again for a couple more
months. But then later on, we found out the first
couple of weeks when he was home, they looked over
him. But then later on, they started to back off.
And then my grandmother said, think that it was OK.
So he started to go out, taking contact, start the
escape as fast as possible. But
the problem was that we were running out of time
because when my dad was still in concentration
camp, my mom wrote a letter. During that two years,
my mom wrote a letter to my grandmother saying
that, OK, it's getting hopeless now. So if you two
want to go over here with us, why don't you go ahead
and make paper? Because at that time, the
government of the communists, the communist
government, agreed to release all of the
handicapped people, all the old people, and all of
the Asian-American
kids to go free as they choose. And so at that time,
my grandfather quickly made paper for them to
leave. For your grandparents to leave. Right, for
my grandparents to leave. So in other words, my
dad, if he would get released, he would be by
himself. So your grandparents are over here now?
Right. My grandparents just got over here last
December, which was 85, December of 85. And so the
paper was being done and there were two ways for
them to come over. One was go straight to United
States or the other go to Canada. Canada is partly
French. And so my grandfather was really
connected with the French. So he wanted to go real
fast, really fast. He didn't want any delay. And
another thing was Canada was more lenient than the
United States at that time because it was so late.
They were getting very hard for you to come in. And
so we told them to go to Canada and then from Canada
make the paper to go to the United States. And so
that's what they did. And it did not take them that
long at all. So your father was by yourself? Yes.
When my father was released, they were still with
him, but they told him what they did, and he said it
was fine, you know. And then later on, we found out
that it was fine because he was being released for
real now, you know. And so he was out making
contact, out meeting all the relatives and the
neighbors and all that, and making contact. And
then later on, My mom wrote another letter saying
that and you know they wrote letter back and forth
and back and forth and then later on they came to an
agreement to let's drop the plan for him to escape
by boat because it was getting too late. It was
1985. And by that time, it would be too dangerous.
And if he would get caught, they would probably
kill him right there. And so they dropped the plan.
And they said, now the government has this new plan
for you to go by paper where you would get on an
airplane and you would fly. And so we agreed that
that would be the plan. But then the only setback
that we had was if you go by boat, it would be faster
for you to come over. If you go by the paper, it would
take so many process from the government of the
United States and the government of the North
Vietnamese that it would take so long that we would
not know how long he would be in order for him to come
over. And so, but we were all willing to sacrifice
the long period of time instead. For safety. Yes,
for safety. So on December, my grandparents had
their name on the list and they left. And at that
time, my dad was in good health, in good condition
already. So he was basically, he was, could be on
his, he could be on his own already. So my mom was
really happy, you know, and all that because we
were really happy when they, when he, when he came
back, that was the only thing. And so, Have y'all
filed the paperwork for your father? Yes. Right
after my mom found out the news that we could do it by
the paperwork, she did it right away. In fact, she
did it for my grandparents also. She did it for my
grandparents, and then she mailed it to my aunt
from Canada. She thought that... It would take my
dad that just that short of a time to go because it
took my grandparents only four months. No,
actually it took them. Yeah, it took them four
months and they were, they were already out. But,
uh, right after my dad came back, she started on it
right away and now it's still going on. And, uh, uh,
you know, once a month we would contact the
attorney. that did the paperwork for us, saying
how long more and all that. And they would make some
excuses. They would say that there's probably
something wrong with it, or they're holding back
the processes or something like that. Or they
would blame it on the North Vietnamese that
they're holding back on the processes. They're
trying to slow it down and all that. So the paper is
still in order right now. I don't know how long it's
gonna be until my dad comes over, but at least the
papers are in. My mom said that But we, our paper is
much faster than other people because we had, when
we came over here, we had a couple of friends that
also had, you know, my friend, my mom, yeah, my
mom's friend, you know, her husband was also in
concentration camp. And so she did that paper and
all that, and she said that it took, that she is
still on the waiting, you know, she is not even on
the waiting list. And we were on the waiting list,
but the waiting list is really long. It's a very
long list. And especially my dad is a special, a
special case so that they would have to take a
really deep, you know, good deal of look and
decision on whether if he is, if they're gonna let
him go or not. Yeah.